1. Introduction
A media platform, such as Spotify or Pandora, leverages the content produced by artists, record labels,
and studios to attract consumers. Advertisers are keen
to reach these consumers to promote their products and
services. This gives the media platform an opportunity to
earn profits from two sides of its market: consumers
and advertisers. We see some music platforms, such as
Pandora and Deezer, generating revenue from both sides
of the market. Some other music platforms, such as Jango
and StreamSquid, offer free content to consumers and
earn all their profits from advertisers. In contrast, adfree music platforms, such as Tidal, earn their entire
profits from consumers. Thus, media-streaming platforms employ a variety of strategies. We also see such
divergence in strategy in other media platforms, such as
streaming video (e.g., Hulu, YouTube, and Netflix) and
cable TV networks (e.g., ESPN and HBO). This observation raises some interesting questions: When is it
optimal for a media platform to offer paid content with
advertising or paid content with no advertising, or even
free content with advertising? How does consumers’
desire for content and advertisers’ desire for consumers affect a platform’s content provision strategy?
Underlying a media platform’s strategy choice is an
inherent trade-off. On the one hand, a media platform
needs to allocate space or bandwidth for content so
that more consumers are drawn to the platform. On
the other hand, the space or bandwidth could be used
to generate advertising revenue, but too much advertising can deter consumers from visiting the platform. We see the Pandora music-streaming platform
experimenting with the proportion of ads to improve
its revenue while recognizing that too many ads will
reduce its customer base (Griffith 2018). Typically,
Pandora streams seven ads per hour, which translates
to an ad for every two or three songs (Gaus 2015).
Prior research on two-sided markets has not focused
1
attention on how a platform allocates its limited space
(or bandwidth) for content and advertising and,
in turn, on how the platform decides on the source of its
profits. The literature simply assumes the way a
platform earns profits, without making the source of
profits an endogenous outcome of the model. For
example, Rochet and Tirole (2006) assume that the
platform charges both consumers and advertisers,
whereas Anderson and Coate (2005) assume that the
platform operates on both sides of the market but
earns all its profits from advertisers. The literature
ignores the fact that some platforms, such as Tidal
and Netflix, strategically choose to forego advertising
revenue. Thus, it is important to scrutinize how market
forces, such as consumers’ desire for content and advertisers’ desire for consumers, shape platforms’ content provision strategies, and furthermore, how the
strategies influence the profits of market participants.
Music-streaming platforms do not produce their
own content but procure it from independent content
providers, and this serves as the third side of the
media market. Most of the independent artists supplying content to music-streaming platforms typically do not have much market power, and the
resulting intense competition in the content market
helps the platforms to procure content at a low price.
The situation is quite different in other media markets. For example, local newspapers source news
from agencies, such as Reuters and the Associated
Press, which have some market power, and thus the
competition between these content providers is moderate. Likewise, Netflix procures its original content from
independent producers and studios who have some
market power. In some extreme cases, the content supplier may offer a highly differentiated content and
consequently wield substantial market power. For example, the National Football League (NFL) is king in
delivering TV audiences, and its prices for broadcasting games are so high that they test the balance
sheets of even the cable TV companies. More recently,
Taylor Swift has tried to assert her market power
with Spotify. This observation about the third side
of a media platform makes one wonder what influence, if any, the nature of competition in the content
market may have on a platform’s content provision
strategy. However, prior literature on two-sided
media markets has not paid much attention to the
nature of competition in the content market.
In this paper, we take a step toward theoretically
examining media platforms’ content provision strategies and their implications for the profits of media
platforms, and furthermore how the content provision strategy varies with the nature of competition in
the content supplier market. Consider a media market
where consumers are on one side and advertisers are
on the other side. To cater to the consumers, media
platforms procure content from independent content
suppliers. As we seek to investigate the effect of the
content market on platforms’ content provision strategies, we consider three different content market
structures: a perfectly competitive content market, a
monopoly content market, and a moderately competitive content market. In these markets, we closely
scrutinize (1) platforms’ content provision strategies, (2) the impact of consumer and advertiser market
characteristics on the profits of media platforms and
those of the content suppliers, and (3) the effect of the
content supplier market structure on platforms’ profits.
Next we proceed to highlight the key findings from
our analysis while relegating an exhaustive summary
of the findings to the conclusion.
When consumers do not derive any disutility from
ads, platforms always allocate some space (or bandwidth) for advertisements and earn profits from advertisers. Whether platforms earn profits from consumers, however, depends on the price of content. If the
content price is low, platforms purchase a large amount
of content and charge consumers for it. But if the content
is expensive, platforms purchase the bare minimum
content, provide it for free, and generate all the profits
from advertisers. When consumers experience a direct
disutility from the advertising, platforms may adopt
a no-ad strategy, but this is so only in a competitive
content market and not in a monopoly content market. To understand this result, notice that platforms
pursue a no-ad strategy only if the content price is low
enough. The monopoly content supplier is not motivated to sell the content at such a low price, whereas
competing content suppliers, if their contents are
sufficiently substitutable, may charge a low price.
Turning attention to platforms’ profits, we find that
in a perfectly competitive content market, consumers’
desire for content hurts platforms’ profits though it
increases consumers’ willingness to pay for content.
We obtain this result because when consumers are
willing to pay more for content, platforms offer a
higher proportion of content and charge consumers a
higher price. Though platforms earn higher revenue
from consumers, they earn lower ad revenue because
of the smaller ad space and pay more for the additional content, thus lowering their profits. The problem is
even more acute when platforms adopt a free-content
strategy, because now platforms earn nothing from
consumers but end up incurring a higher content procurement cost and lower advertising revenue. Next,
contrary to the findings in prior literature (e.g.,
Armstrong 2006), we find that an increase in advertisers’ desire for consumers can improve platforms’
profits. Specifically, as advertisers’ desire for consumers increases, platforms pursuing a paid-contentwith-ads strategy offer content at a lower price, but
they reduce the proportion of content and increase
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
2 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS
that of advertising. This yields a higher advertising revenue and a lower procurement cost, which
together more than offset the loss in consumer revenue. Under a free-content strategy, although platforms offer more content and less advertising, they
charge a much higher advertising price and incur no
loss in consumer revenue at all, thus increasing their
overall profits. Upon investigating the effect of content
price on platforms’ profits, we obtain an interesting
result. We know that if content suppliers increase
their content price, platforms incur a higher content
procurement cost. Despite the direct negative effect
on platforms’ profits, the content price can still raise
platforms’ profits if the content price is sufficiently
high and platforms adopt a free-content strategy. We
obtain this result because in such a case, a further
increase in content price motivates platforms to reduce the proportion of content, which not only minimizes the direct negative impact but also increases
the advertising revenue, thereby improving the overall
profits of the platforms.
On examining platforms’ profits in a monopoly
content market, contrary to intuition, we find that the
monopoly content supplier cannot leverage its market power to extract all the surplus from competing
platforms. To follow the rationale for this finding,
first note that under a paid-content-with-ads strategy when faced with a higher content price, platforms
can choose to offer a lower proportion of content,
thereby reducing the content procurement cost and
increasing the advertising revenue. Thus, the demand for content is elastic to content price, making
it difficult for the monopoly content supplier to extract all the profits from competing platforms. Even
if platforms adopt a free-content strategy, the monopoly content supplier cannot fully exercise its power.
This is because platforms adopting a free-content
strategy compete to offer consumers a higher proportion of content. While making the decision to
offer a higher proportion of content, platforms weigh
the additional procurement cost and the loss in advertising revenue against the benefit of attracting
additional consumers. Consequently, the demand
for content is sensitive to price change, limiting the
monopoly content supplier’s ability to extract profits.
Shifting attention to the content supplier’s profits, we
find that the monopoly content supplier’s profits increase if consumers’ desire for content increases. This
is because platforms offer more content to consumers,
and the increased demand benefits the sole supplier
of content in the market. However, when advertisers’
desire for consumers increases, the monopoly content
supplier’s profits can decline. In particular, if platforms adopt a paid-content-with-ads strategy, as
noted earlier, they host a higher proportion of advertising but offer less content to consumers; this, in
turn, decreases the demand for content and reduces
the content supplier’s profits. We obtain the opposite
result if platforms adopt a free-content strategy because under this strategy, as advertisers’ desire for
consumers increases, platforms offer more content to
build a larger consumer base.
Finally, to further examine the effect of the content
market structure on platforms’ profits, we examine a
moderately competitive content market. One might
expect a competing content supplier to charge a lower
price for content compared with the price charged
by a monopoly content supplier. Our findings run
counter to this intuition. Notice that if the focal
content supplier increases the price of its content, a
platform could either switch to purchasing content
from the competing supplier or reduce the overall
proportion of content provided on the platform. In
this context, if the content suppliers are less substitutable, the platform reduces the proportion of content instead of switching to the competing supplier,
and thus the focal content supplier does not fully
internalize the negative effect of its price increase.
This reality encourages the competing content suppliers to charge higher prices than the price a monopoly content supplier might charge.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 discusses the related literature and highlights the contribution of our work. Section 3 lays out
the model structure. Section 4 analyzes a perfectly
competitive content market. Section 5 examines a
monopoly content market, whereas Section 6 investigates a moderately competitive content market. Section 7 concludes the paper. The proofs for all the claims
made in the paper can be seen in the appendix.
2. Related Literature and Contribution
The seminal work on two-sided platforms highlights
the cross-side externalities in buyer–seller markets
and provides a theoretical framework for analyzing
these markets (e,g., Caillaud and Jullien 2003, Rochet
and Tirole 2003, Armstrong 2006, Rochet and Tirole
2006, Armstrong and Wright 2007). In these twosided markets, researchers have examined various
issues, such as platform competition (Armstrong 2006,
Armstrong and Wright 2007), pricing (Weyl 2010,
Chao and Derdenger 2013), and network asymmetry
(Ambrus and Argenziano 2009).
Our research is directly related to the literature on
two-sided media markets. Empirical evidence suggests
that consumers dislike advertisements (Wilbur 2008),
whereas advertisers like to reach consumers (Argentesi
and Filistrucchi 2007). Dukes and Gal-Or (2003)
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS 3
show that broadcasters can benefit from offering
exclusive advertising contracts. This is because exclusive advertising contracts soften the competition in
the product market and help advertisers earn more
profits, which permits the broadcasters to charge higher
prices to advertisers. Anderson and Coate (2005) show
that, depending on the extent to which consumers
regard advertising as a nuisance, competing platforms may overprovide or underprovide advertisements (compared with the socially optimal level of
advertising). Godes et al. (2009) find that competition
for advertisers makes a competing platform less
willing to undercut the price for consumers. Amaldoss
et al. (2016) identify the conditions under which
competing platforms may offer consumers the option
of paying a high price in order to avoid advertisements, and when they would not offer consumers
such an option. Research shows that consumers who
switch between channels are less valuable than exclusive
consumers (Athey et al. 2014, Ambrus et al. 2017).
As the proportion of such multihoming consumers
increases, each platform increases the advertising
level and earns less profits. This body of literature
focuses on the consumer side and the advertiser side
of the media market but abstracts away from the
content side of the market. The platform in our model
connects three sides of the media market: consumers,
advertisers, and content suppliers. Moreover, unlike
most existing studies that only capture consumers’
dislike for advertisements and advertisers’ desire for
consumers, our framework captures consumers’ desire for content. Furthermore, we examine how a
platform should allocate its limited bandwidth for
content and advertising.
Our work also adds to the literature on content
provision by media firms (for a review, see Peitz and
Reisinger 2015). In an early work, Prasad et al. (2003)
examine a monopoly platform that offers its own
content. The consumer market comprises two segments, with one segment valuing the content more
than the other, whereas the advertiser market includes firms with heterogeneous margins. Using this
setting, they identify conditions when it is profitable
for the monopoly platform to discriminate between
the two segments of consumers by offering them two
options: a higher price with fewer ads and a lower
price with more ads. In contrast to Prasad et al. (2003),
we allow for interplatform competition, let the platform procure its content from independent content
suppliers, and vary the level of competition in the
content market. The addition of a third side to the
market helps us to delineate the effects of consumers’
desire for content and advertisers’ desire for consumers on the content supplier’s profits, and also investigate how a platform’s content provision strategy
varies with the structure of the content market. Gal-Or
and Dukes (2003) show that competing platforms
might offer minimally differentiated content. This
reduces the intensity of advertising and thereby the
competition among advertisers in the product market, which helps the platforms to charge more for
advertising. Upon empirically examining the content
quality of 3,000 bloggers in China, Sun and Zhu (2013)
report that bloggers, who partake in the advertising
revenue of the platform, write about popular topics
such as the stock market and celebrity news. Yao
et al. (2016) find that within-show TV commercials
create a better viewing experience for highly rated
content but not for poorly rated content. Next, we
outline our model.
3. Model
Consider a duopoly media market where media platforms face three sides, namely, consumers, advertisers,
and content suppliers. The platforms procure content
from suppliers, allocate a proportion of bandwidth or
space for content to attract consumers, and host the
promotional messages of advertisers. Below we describe
the three sides of the market and the platform.
3.1. Consumers
Consumers join a platform to enjoy its content. The
utility that a consumer derives from the content of
platform i is given by
v · αi − 1
2
α2
i
( ), (1)
where v represents the strength of consumers’ desire
for content, and αi is the proportion of platform i’s
bandwidth or space allocated for content (αi ∈ [0, 1]).
This formulation captures in a parsimonious way the
reality that as the proportion of content increases, the
utility of the incremental content is likely to be lower
(e.g., Horowitz et al. 2007, Han et al. 2016).
As αi is the proportion of platform i’s space allocated for content, the remaining (1 − αi) proportion is
allocated for advertising. An important implication of
this formulation is that when deciding on the proportion of space for content, a platform needs to
recognize that the marginal utility of content declines
and carefully balance the potential revenue from
consumers and the advertising revenue.1 Furthermore, consumers are heterogeneous in their preference for a platform (for reasons such as interface and
service), and we capture the heterogeneity by assuming that consumers are uniformly distributed on
a Hotelling line of unit length. Consider a consumer
located at distance x from platform i. The disutility
this consumer experiences because of lack of fit
with the platform is given by tx, where t denotes
consumers’ sensitivity to platform characteristics.
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
4 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS
Thus, the consumer derives the following (indirect)
utility on joining platform i:
UiC( ) x  v · αi − 1
2
α2
i
( )
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟ utility from content
− t · x
⏟⏞⏞⏟
disutility from lack of fit
− piC
⏟⏞⏞⏟
price
,
(2)
where piC is the price paid by the consumer for
joining the platform.2 This (indirect) utility formulation is in keeping with the practice of media platforms charging consumers subscription prices to
access the platforms.
3.2. Advertisers
Advertisers join a platform to promote their products
and services to consumers. Let γA denote advertisers’
valuation of a consumer. In other words, γA is the
value advertisers place on one consumer’s eyeballs.
When an advertiser can reach niC consumers through
platform i, the utility the advertiser derives from
joining platform i is given by γA · niC. Given that
advertising space is scarce, we assume that a platform
can capture the entire surplus from advertisers. In
keeping with this assumption, advertising price is
often as high as advertisers’ full valuation in competitive advertising markets, such as advertising auctions (e.g., Shin 2015). Moreover, the assumption allows us to focus on the issue of content provision
while abstracting away from the dynamics of the
advertising market. Thus, a platform sets the advertising price for one unit of space as
piA  γA · niC. (3)
Then, platform i’s advertising revenue from its (1 − αi)
unit of advertising space is given by γA · niC · (1 − αi).
Later, in Section 4.4, we consider the case where the
price that advertisers’ pay a platform could be sensitive to the proportion of content on the platform.
3.3. Content Suppliers
Independent content suppliers produce the content.
Each platform buys the content from the suppliers
and makes it available to consumers, and thus serves
as a channel for suppliers to reach consumers. Let c be
the marginal cost of producing content, and further
assume that c is smaller than t
2.
3 Because platform i
allocates αi proportion of its bandwidth for content,
the content supplier earns the following profits from
the platforms:
ΠS  pS − c ( ) ·
∑
i
αi, (4)
where pS is the price the supplier charges for a unit
of content.
3.4. Media Platforms
Although media platforms pay the supplier for the
content, they can potentially generate revenue from
consumers and advertisers. Platform i’s profits are
given by
ΠiP  niC · piC + ( ) 1 − αi · piA − αi · pS. (5)
In this setting, a platform faces two key decisions:
(1) what proportion of its limited bandwidth should it
allocate for content? and (2) what price should it
charge to consumers? In its attempt to maximize
profits, a platform could pursue one of the following strategies:
• Free-content strategy. The platform allocates a
fraction of its bandwidth for content and offers the
content for free to consumers, implying 0 < αi < 1 and
piC  0. The platform chooses to earn all its profits
from advertisers when pursuing this strategy.
• No-ad strategy. The platform allocates all its bandwidth for content and charges consumers a price for the
content, implying αi  1 and piC > 0. Now the platform
earns its entire profits from consumers and eschews
the advertisers. More precisely, the platform is adopting
a paid-content-with-no-ads strategy. However, for the
sake of brevity, we refer to it as a no-ad strategy.
• Paid-content-with-ads strategy.The platform allocates
a fraction of its bandwidth to content, and charges a
positive price for consuming the content, suggesting
0 < αi < 1 and piC > 0. In this case, the platform earns
profits from both the sides of the market.
3.5. Decision Sequence
The decisions are made in three stages. In the first
stage, the content supplier sets a price for content (pS).
In the second stage, after observing the content supplier’s
price, each media platform decides on the proportion
of content (αi) and the price for consumers (piC). Finally, in the third stage, after observing the price for
consumers and the proportion of content, consumers
decide which platform to join.
To understand the strategic behavior of market
participants, we examine the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game. Furthermore, to help us better
appreciate the effect of market structure on the
equilibrium outcome, we focus on the parameter
space where platforms choose to cover the entire
consumer market and where all the content provision strategies of platforms are feasible. The precise
conditions are specified in the online appendix (see
Lemmas 2 and 3).
4. A Perfectly Competitive Content Market
We begin our analysis by considering a content market
where an infinite number of homogeneous content
suppliers engage in Bertrand competition. Because of
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS 5
intense competition, the equilibrium content supplier
price is driven down to the marginal cost of producing content:
pS  c. (6)
Recognizing that content is sold by suppliers at
marginal cost, media platform i sets the consumer
price piC and chooses the proportion of content αi. As
content suppliers are price takers, they do not directly
influence a platform’s strategy. This permits us to
study how a platform’s choice of strategy is affected
by the characteristics of the consumer and advertising markets.4
4.1. Analysis
Assume that platform 1 is located at x  0, whereas
platform 2 is located at x  1 on the Hotelling line.
Consider a consumer located at distance x from
platform 1. The (indirect) utility that the consumer
derives on joining platform 1 and the corresponding
utility from joining platform 2 are as follows:
U1C( ) x  v · α1 − 1
2
α2
1
( ) − t · x − p1C, (7)
U2C( ) x  v · α2 − 1
2
α2
2
( ) − t · ( ) 1 − x − p2C. (8)
The marginal consumer who is indifferent between
joining the two platforms is given by
x0  1
2 +
V( ) α1 − V( ) α2
2t − p1C − p2C
2t , (9)
where V(αi)  v · (αi − 1
2 α2
i ) is the gross utility a consumer derives from joining a platform that hosts αi
fraction of content and (1 − αi) fraction of advertisements. We assume that consumers single-home. The
mass of consumers joining platform 1 is given by n1C  x0,
and the corresponding consumers joining platform 2
is n2C  1 − x0. Then, as given in Equation (3), each
platform charges its advertisers piA  γA · niC.
On substituting pS, niC, and piA (i  {1, 2}) in
Equation (5), we obtain platform i’s profits ΠiP as a
function of its two decision variables {αi, piC}. Both
platforms simultaneously choose αi and piC to maximize their own profits ΠiP subject to 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1 and
piC ≥ 0. Let αf and αpa denote the demand for content
from a platform when pursuing a free-content strategy and a paid-content-with-ads strategy, respectively. Upon solving for the equilibrium, we find that
the proportion of content hosted by a platform is
αi
αf  1 − t( ) 2c+γA ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
t·vγA( ) 2c+γA
√ if, c ≥ τ
αpa  −2c−γA+v
v if c < τ,
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(10)
where τ  1
2 · (−γA + t·v
γA
). The detailed derivation of the
equilibrium can be seen in the appendix.5
4.2. Platforms’ Strategies and Profits
Here we first discuss a platform’s choice of strategy,
and then examine how the choice is influenced by
market characteristics. In principle, a platform could
adopt one of the three potential content provision
strategies: a free-content strategy, a paid-contentwith-ads strategy, or a no-ad strategy. However,
neither of the competing platforms adopts a no-ad
strategy (see Equation (10)). To understand why, note
that in the current formulation, advertising neither
annoys consumers nor directly induces a disutility.
As a result, a platform always allocates a proportion
of its space for advertising and earns profits from advertisers without any backlash from consumers. One
could argue that consumers regard advertising as a
nuisance and thus dislike advertising. We explore the
strategic implications of this possibility in Section 7.
Given that a platform is not motivated to adopt a
no-ad strategy, it could adopt either a free-content
strategy or a paid-content-with-ads strategy. From
Equation (10), we know that platforms adopt a freecontent strategy if the suppliers’ marginal cost of
producing content is large but pursue a paid-contentwith-ads strategy otherwise. To appreciate this result,
recall that in a perfectly competitive market, content
suppliers sell content at the marginal cost. As the
marginal cost increases, it becomes costlier for a
platform to attract consumers by offering them more
content. Hence, a platform allocates a lower proportion of its space for content, and comes to rely
more on profits from advertisers. When the marginal
cost is sufficiently high, a platform allocates only a
limited space for content and generates all its profits
from advertising. Thus, when the marginal cost of
content increases beyond a certain threshold, platforms transition from pursuing a paid-content-withads strategy to adopting a free-content strategy.
Having understood platforms’ equilibrium strategy choice, we turn to examining how the choice is
shaped by market characteristics. We have the following finding.
Proposition 1. (a) As consumers’ desire for content grows,
platforms switch from using a free-content strategy to
adopting a paid-content-with-ads strategy and earn less
profits. (b) As advertisers’ desire for consumers becomes
stronger, platforms switch from pursuing a paid-contentwith-ads strategy to implementing a free-content strategy
and earn more profits.
To understand the intuition for the first part of the
proposition, notice that when consumers’ desire for
content (v) increases, they are willing to pay more
for the content, and this makes a paid-content-with-ads
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
6 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS
strategy more attractive relative to a free-content
strategy. Naturally, when v is larger, platforms switch
from a free-content strategy to a paid-content-withads strategy. Despite the transition to a potentially
more profitable strategy, platforms earn lower profits.
To see the reason, first focus on a paid-content-with-ads
strategy. Under this strategy, both platforms charge a
higher price to consumers as v increases. Furthermore, to remain attractive at the higher price, platforms offer a higher proportion of content to consumers, leaving less space for advertising. Thus,
platforms earn more revenue from consumers but earn
lower advertising revenue, resulting in no change in the
net revenue. The cost of procuring content, however,
increases with a larger v because platforms offer a
higher proportion of content. Therefore, the overall
profits of the platforms decrease. Next, even under a
free-content strategy, profits decrease with v. To
see this, note that platforms’ revenue comes only
from the advertiser side. However, to increase the
advertising revenue, platforms need to attract consumers by providing more content. In this situation,
when consumers’ desire for content increases, platforms compete for consumers more intensely by increasing the proportion of content. This reduces the
space available for advertising, thus decreasing the
advertising revenue. Moreover, providing a higher
proportion of content increases the cost of procuring
content and lowers the advertising revenue, leading
platforms to earn lower profits under a free-content
strategy. Therefore, with a larger v, platforms’ profits
decrease under both a paid-content-with-ads strategy and a free-content strategy, suggesting that platforms’ profits can decrease despite a seemingly profitable transition in strategy.
The second part of the proposition describes the
influence of advertisers’ desire for consumers (i.e., γA)
on platforms’ strategy and profits. Because γA increases advertisers’ willingness to pay, a greater γA
makes a free-content strategy more attractive relative
to a paid-content-with-ads strategy. Thus, as advertisers’ desire for consumers increases, platforms switch
from a paid-content-with-ads strategy to a free-content
strategy. In contrast to Proposition 1(a), this change in
strategy increases platforms’ profits. To follow the
intuition for this finding, note that when platforms
adopt a paid-content-with-ads strategy, an increase in
advertisers’ desire for consumers motivates both platforms to increase the advertising space by reducing the
proportion of content. In this case, platforms can still
compete to win consumers by decreasing their prices.
As a result, platforms’ advertising revenue increases
while the content revenue decreases, and these two
changes in revenue cancel each other. Yet, the overall
profits increase because of the savings from providing a
lower proportion of content. Next, when a platform
adopts a free-content strategy, it cannot compete for
consumers by lowering the price, but only by offering a
higher proportion of content. As γA increases, each
consumer is worth more to advertisers, and the platforms thus charge a higher price to advertisers. Therefore, with a larger γA, both platforms offer a higher
proportion of content to attract more consumers. This
raises the content procurement cost. However, they
earn more revenue because of the higher advertising
revenue, and it more than offsets the cost increase.
Hence, under both strategies, an increase in γA raises
the platforms’ profits, and this, in turn, raises their
profits even with the transition of the strategy.6
4.3. Content Price
Recall that our model explicitly considers content
suppliers. In a perfectly competitive content market,
the equilibrium content price is the marginal cost at
which content suppliers produce the content. Although each content supplier has limited control over
its own content price, the content price can still influence platforms’ strategies and profits, and we seek
to explore it. One may expect platforms’ profits to
decrease with content price because an increase in
content price raises the procurement cost of the platforms. Yet we have the following result.
Proposition 2. When the price of content is sufficiently
high, an increase in content price improves competing
platforms’ profits.
Note that when the content price increases, platforms pay more for a unit of content, and this has a
direct negative effect on platforms’ profits. However,
when both platforms 1 and 2 adopt a free-content
strategy, an increase in content price motivates the
platforms to purchase less content and allocate a higher
proportion of space for advertising, thus inducing a
higher advertising revenue. Recall that when the content price is sufficiently high, platforms pursue a freecontent strategy and allocate a relatively small proportion of space for content. In this case, when the
content price increases, the increase in the procurement
cost has a minimal impact on profits because of the
lower volume of content, and it is dominated by the gain
in advertising revenue.
4.4. Discussion
In the preceding analysis, we assume that advertisers
care about whether consumers are exposed to the
advertising hosted on a platform. However, advertisers could also care about the duration for which
consumers are exposed to their advertisements, especially if the advertisements contain new information and are not merely reminding consumers of
salient aspects of their products. If so, advertisers
would be willing to pay a higher price for advertising
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS 7
when a platform hosts a higher proportion of content.
This is because consumers are likely to spend more
time on a platform with a higher proportion of content
and thus be exposed to the advertisements for a
longer period of time. To explore the implications of
this possibility, let the price of advertising for one unit
of space be
piA  αk · γA · niC, (11)
where 0 ≤ k ≤ 1. The parameter k captures the sensitivity of the ad price to the proportion of content on a
platform. Notice that the original formulation of the
ad price (see Equation (3)) is a special case of this
formulation where k  0.
To focus attention, consider the case where k  1.
Notice that the price advertisers are willing to pay is
fully scaled to the proportion of content on the
platform. Now when the proportion of content on a
platform (i.e., αi) increases, it raises both consumers’
utility and advertisers’ willingness to pay for advertising, making it doubly attractive for a platform to
increase the content on its platform. However, the
advertising revenue a platform earns depends on the
(1 − αi) proportion of space allocated for advertising,
and hence, each platform needs to carefully decide on
the proportion of space to allocate for content and
thereby the source of its profits. In this setting, consistent with Proposition 1(a), as consumers’ desire for
content increases, platforms transition from using a
free-content strategy to adopting a paid-content-withads strategy and earn less profit, and in keeping with
Proposition 1(b), as advertisers’ desire for consumers
grows, platforms transition from using a paid-contentwith-ads strategy to adopting a free-content strategy
and earn more profits (see Claim 2 of the appendix for
details). The intuition for these results is the same as
that provided for Proposition 1 because the inherent
trade-off between advertising revenue and consumer
revenue has not changed, though platforms now
host a higher proportion of content in equilibrium.
According to Proposition 2, an increase in content
price can improve platforms’ profits. When k  1, we
do not obtain the same result. To understand why,
recall that at any given content price, platforms now
host a larger amount of content (compared with the
case when k  0) because they can charge a higher ad
price with more content. In this context, an increase
in content price motivates both platforms to decrease
the proportion of content to a lesser extent, and the
resulting increase in the ad revenue is not large
enough to offset the increase in the content procurement cost. However, as the ad price becomes less
sensitive to the proportion of content (i.e., as k decreases), platforms become more motivated to decrease
the proportion of content, thus reducing the loss.
Eventually, for a sufficiently small (but nonzero) k, we
obtain the same result as in Proposition 2. We establish
this claim in the appendix (see Claim 3).
5. A Monopoly Content Market
The previous section provides an analysis of a perfectly competitive content market where content suppliers have no market power. In this section, we examine
a monopoly content market where the content supplier
chooses the content price pS to maximize its own profits.
This setting allows us to examine the strategic interaction between the content supplier and platforms
and study its effect on the equilibrium outcome. In
what follows, we briefly discuss the analysis of the
game and then present the platforms’ equilibrium
strategies as well as the content supplier’s price.
5.1. Analysis
We solve the game using backward induction. First,
note that the second stage of the game is identical to
that in the previous section, except that the content
price is now pS instead of c. Thus, we use the same
solution given in (10) but replace c with pS. Anticipating the likely behavior of platforms in the second
stage of the game, the monopolist content supplier
chooses the content price in the first stage of the game
to maximize its own profits:
max
pS
ΠS  pS − c ( ) ·
∑
2
i1
αi pS
( ), (12)
subject to the participation constraint of the platforms, namely, ΠiP(pS) ≥ 0. We discuss the equilibrium results below and present the detailed analysis
in the appendix.
5.2. Platforms’ Strategies and Profits
Recall that content suppliers are nonstrategic players
in a perfectly competitive content market. Thus, the
analysis presented in the previous section is applicable for the subgame where competing platforms
each choose the proportion of content and set a price
for consumers, given a content price. The new element in
the analysis of a monopoly content market is that the
content supplier, as a strategic player, sets the price of
content to maximize its profits (instead of being a price
taker, as in the perfectly competitive market).
We start our analysis by discussing the platforms’
optimal strategy choice. As in the perfectly competitive content market, a no-ad strategy is not observed
in equilibrium. Furthermore, consistent with Proposition 1, as advertisers’ desire for consumers increases,
platforms transition from a paid-content-with-ads
strategy to a free-content strategy. Also in keeping
with Proposition 1, as consumers’ desire for content
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
8 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS
increases, the platforms generally switch from a freecontent strategy to a paid-content-with-ads strategy.
However, we also observe that when consumers’
desire for content is very high, platforms may switch
back from a paid-content-with-ads strategy to a freecontent strategy. This happens because when v is very
high, the monopolist content supplier charges a very
high content price, pushing down the platforms’
profits to zero under a paid-content-with-ads strategy
and thereby inducing them to switch to a free-content
strategy. Moreover, the effects of consumers’ desire
for content and advertisers’ desire for consumers on
platforms’ profits remain the same as in Proposition 1,
except that the profits may decrease for an intermediate γA under a free-content strategy (because of a
higher content price charged by the content supplier).
These results clarify how the content supplier’s strategic
choice of price can affect the profits of the platforms
and, in turn, change the equilibrium content provision
strategy of the platforms. We prove these claims in the
appendix (see Claim 4).
Next we examine how the monopoly content supplier’s profits change with market characteristics.
Interestingly, we find that platforms’ strategy may
moderate the direction of the influence, as highlighted
in the following proposition.
Proposition 3. (a) As consumers’ desire for content gets
stronger, the content supplier earns more profits regardless
of platforms’ content provision strategy. (b) As advertisers’
desire for consumers gets stronger, the content supplier
earns less profits under a paid-content-with-ads strategy but
more profits under a free-content strategy.
The first part of the proposition can be easily understood by recalling that with a larger v, platforms
increase content provision under both strategies. As
the sole content supplier in the market, the monopoly
content supplier captures the increase in the content
provision cost as its own revenue; hence, the content
supplier’s profits increase with consumers’ desire for
content. The second part of the proposition, in contrast, shows that the impact of advertisers’ desire for
consumers on the content supplier’s profits crucially
depends on the strategy chosen by the platforms. To
understand this result, first recall that an increase in
the advertisers’ desire for consumers motivates both
platforms to offer less content under a paid-contentwith-ads strategy but more content under a freecontent strategy. In the former case, the content supplier earns less profit because it faces a weaker demand.
In the latter case, the monopolist content supplier earns
more profit because the demand is stronger. Hence,
advertisers’ desire for consumers can have opposing
effects on the content supplier’s profits (depending on
platforms’ content provision strategies).
5.3. Content Price
In this section, we examine the equilibrium consequence of the content supplier’s strategic choice of
content price. It is natural to think that a monopolist
content supplier would be able to extract all the
surplus from the competing platforms. However,
the following proposition shows that this belief is
not valid.
Proposition 4. Even in the presence of interplatform competition, a monopoly content supplier may not be able to
extract all surplus from the platforms.
To follow the intuition for thisfinding, consider a paidcontent-with-ads strategy and recall that a competing
platform’s demand for content in this case is given by
αpa pS
( )  −2pS − γA + v
v . (13)
Thus, under a paid-content-with-ads strategy, each platform’s demand for content is elastic to the content price.
This is because the platforms have an option to earn
profits from the advertiser side of the market. Thus, if
the content price is too high, they can give up some
profits from the consumer side by reducing the space
for content, and instead increase the space for advertising. Therefore, the monopolist content supplier may
not exercise its monopoly power over the competing platforms.
Under a free-content strategy, the platforms do not
earn profits from the consumer side. For this reason,
one may expect the platforms to offer the minimum
content needed to attract consumers, and one may
further believe that the demand for content is inelastic
to the content price. But the demand for content
under a free-content strategy shows that this is not
the case:
αf pS
( )  1 − t 2pS + γA
( )
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
t · vγA 2pS + γA
√ ( ). (14)
This is because platforms compete for consumers by
offering them a higher proportion of content. In
doing so, platforms carefully balance the additional
benefit of allocating a higher proportion of content
against its cost, which includes not only the forgone
advertising revenue but also the payment to the
content supplier. Therefore, a platform’s demand for
content is sensitive to the content price, and this
elastic demand for content may prevent the monopolist content supplier from setting its content
price high enough to extract all the surplus from the
competing platforms.
6. Moderately Competitive Content Market
In the previous two sections, we examined how
consumer characteristics affect a platform’s choice of
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS 9
strategy and, in turn, the profits of the platform as
well as those of the content supplier. We explored this
issue in the context of a perfectly competitive content
market and a monopoly content market. In contrast to
these two polar content market structures, in some
markets, we observe only a few content suppliers, and
the competition in the content market is moderate. In
this section, we examine how moderate competition
between content suppliers affects equilibrium behavior.
Typically, competition lowers price. In Section 6.1, we
explore whether this intuition applies to the price of
content in a multisided market. Next, in some markets, platforms adopt a no-ad strategy. In Section 6.2,
we investigate how the nature of competition in the
content market may moderate platforms’ choice of a
no-ad strategy.
To facilitate the analysis, we normalize the content
production cost c to zero and focus on the symmetric
equilibrium in both stages of the game.
6.1. Effect of Moderate Competition on
Content Price
Consider a duopoly content market. Each platform in
the market procures content from the two suppliers
and uses the content to attract consumers to its
platform. Let pjS be the price of content offered by
supplier j, and let hi(p1S, p2S) be the proportion of
content platform i buys from supplier 1. It follows that
1 − hi(p1S, p2S) is the proportion of content platform i
purchases from supplier 2. Hereafter, for the sake of
brevity, we drop the prices in hi(p1S, p2S) and use hi to
denote the proportion of content that platformi procures
from supplier 1. Given the content procurement decision hi, the profits of platform i are as follows:
ΠiP  niC · piC ⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟ revenue from consumers
+ ( ) 1 − αi · piA ⏟̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅⏟ revenue from advertisers
− αi · hi · p1S
⏟̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅⏟
cost of content from supplier 1
− αi · ( ) 1 − hi · p2S
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
cost of content from supplier 2
. (15)
The corresponding profits of the two content suppliers are given by
Π1S  p1S ·
∑
i
αi ( ) · hi , (16)
Π2S  p2S ·
∑
i
αi ( ) · ( ) 1 − hi . (17)
To ensure that the demand decreases with price, we
assume ∂Σi(αi·hi)
∂p1S < 0 and ∂Σi(αi·(1−hi))
∂p2S < 0. In this analysis,
we focus on two content suppliers who are horizontally differentiated from the perspective of the
platforms in a variety of ways, such as proximity,
relationships with key personnel, and the integration
of systems. These factors may influence platforms’
procurement decisions (through the shape of the
function hi(pS1, pS2)), but do not affect the utility that
consumers derive from the content. This formulation
helps us to abstract away from the effect of content
differentiation on consumer utility and focus attention on how mere competition between content suppliers affects content price. Now we proceed to examine
the role of competition on the equilibrium content price.
We use the marginal substitution rate (MRS) of the two
content suppliers as a measure of the intensity of
competition between them. The marginal substitution rate gives the percentage change in the fraction of
content demanded from a content supplier when its
own content price increases by 1%. For example, the
marginal substitution rate of supplier 1 is given by
MRS1 p1S, p2S
( ) ≡ ∂h/h
∂p1S/p1S
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
, (18)
where h is defined in a symmetric equilibrium as
h ≡ h1  h2. A high MRS suggests that the content
suppliers are more substitutable and that the content
market is more competitive, whereas a low MRS
implies that the content market is less competitive.
Note that for mathematical tractability, we assume
that h is twice continuously differentiable almost
everywhere and that the profit function of each content
supplier is concave with respect to its own price. The
precise condition on the h function under which the
profit function is concave can be found in the appendix (see Lemma 5). As a measure of competitiveness at the monopoly content price p∗, we define
MRS∗ ≡ MRS|
p1Sp2Sp∗
S
. As in the previous sections, we
derive the equilibrium using backward induction. To
focus on how the competition between content suppliers alters the content prices, we examine the symmetric equilibrium of the first-stage game.
Recall that in a typical one-sided market, when a seller
faces competition, it reduces its price. On examining
the content suppliers’ prices in a multi-sided media
market, however, we obtain the following finding.
Proposition 5. Compared with a monopoly content supplier’s interior solution, a content supplier facing weak
competition (MRS∗ < 1
2) raises its content price.
To follow this result, it is helpful to appreciate an
important difference between a traditional one-sided
market and a multisided media market. In a traditional market, if a seller increases the price, buyers can
switch to the competing seller. In the multisided
media market, if a content supplier increases its
price, a platform can deal with it in two ways: the
platform can either switch to the competing content
supplier or reduce the proportion of content on its
platform and generate more advertising revenue.
Therefore, when setting its content price, a content
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
10 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS
supplier needs to carefully consider the likely response of the platform. If the platform switches to the
competing supplier, the focal content supplier bears
the full burden of the price increase, and accordingly
the demand for its content decreases. But if the
platform reduces the proportion of content, it decreases the overall demand for content (from both
suppliers), and the focal content supplier does not
bear the full burden of its price increase.
Now focus on the case where the contents of the two
suppliers are less substitutable (i.e., MRS∗ < 1
2). In this
instance, if a content supplier unilaterally increases
its content price, a platform reduces the proportion
of content on its platform rather than switching to
the other supplier. This, in turn, adversely affects
the demand of the rival content supplier. Because the
focal content supplier does not fully internalize the
negative effects of its higher price, the supplier finds
it attractive to raise the price for its content. Moreover,
if contents are less substitutable, the elasticity of
demand of the duopoly content supplier is lower
(compared with that of a monopoly content supplier).
Consequently, the equilibrium price in a duopoly
content supplier market is higher than that in a monopoly content supplier market.
6.2. Effect of Moderate Competition on a Platform’s
Choice of a No-Ad Strategy
In our original model, we assumed that consumers do
not experience any direct disutility because of advertising. However, one could argue that advertising
in online platforms are often viewed as a nuisance by
consumers. We extend the model to allow for the possibility that consumers could experience a direct disutility because of the advertising in a platform. Then,
using this setup, we investigate the role of competition
in shaping platforms’ choice of a no-ad strategy.
Let γC(≥ 0) denote consumers’ dislike for a unit
space of advertisements. Then a consumer located at
distance x from platform i will derive the following
utility on joining platform 1:
UiC( ) x  v · αi − 1
2
α2
i
( )
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟ utility from content
− γC · ( ) 1 − αi
⏟̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅⏟
distuility from ads
− t · x
⏟⏞⏞⏟
disutility from lack of fit
− piC
⏟⏞⏞⏟
price
. (19)
It is worth noting that the disutility from ads is linear
to the proportion of ads. This formulation reflects the
reality that consumers’ effort to ignore and skip ads is
linear in the number of ads.7 The utility derived from
joining platform 2 can be likewise obtained. Note that
our main model is a special case of this formulation if
we set γC  0. On analyzing this extension, we can
recover the qualitative results presented in Propositions 3 and 4. In addition, we have the following result.
Proposition 6. Even if consumers derive disutility from
seeing an ad (i.e., γC > 0), platforms never adopt a no-ad
strategy in a monopoly content supplier market. However,
in a competitive content supplier market, platforms may
adopt a no-ad strategy even when it is feasible to earn profits
from the advertiser side of the market.
To understand the rationale for this proposition,
recall that a platform adopts a no-ad strategy only
when the content price is sufficiently low. The monopoly content supplier, however, is not motivated to
offer content at such a low price. This is because
platforms purchase the maximum amount of content
when they pursue a no-ad strategy, and this inelastic
demand encourages the monopoly content supplier
to raise its content price to maximize profits. The
resulting high content price motivates both platforms
to cater to advertisers, and thus they pursue either a
paid-content-with-ads strategy or a free-content strategy. Next, the situation is very different when content
suppliers compete. If the contents are sufficiently substitutable, the price of content is reduced. The low price
of content can motivate platforms to adopt a no-ad
strategy and earn all of their profits from consumers.
Thus, in the presence of a competitive content supplier
market, platforms may forgo advertising revenue even
when they could earn some profits from advertisers by
pursuing a multisided strategy. These findings are in
line with business practice. For example, media platforms such as Tidal and Netflix, who procure content
from competing content suppliers, offer the content to
consumers without ads. In contrast, cable TV stations
broadcasting the Olympics or FIFA World Cup (provided by suppliers with some market power) typically
host advertisements while also charging viewers.
7. Conclusion
As multisided media markets are far more complex
institutions than the traditional one-sided markets, it
is difficult for a manager to conjecture how the different sides of a media market might interact in a
given situation, and even more difficult to choose the
optimal strategy based on intuition or empirical data
on a firm operating on one side of the market. The
purpose of this paper is to take a step toward theoretically examining media platforms’ content provision strategies and their implications for platforms’
profits and content suppliers’ profits. Toward this
goal, we build a model where media platforms interact with three sides of the market—content suppliers, consumers, and advertisers. As can be seen
from the summary of findings presented in Table 1,
multisided media markets can work in ways counter
to our intuition, and it is important to have a nuanced
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS 11
Table 1. Summary of Results
Market structure
Perfectly competitive content market Monopoly content market Moderately competitive content market
Focus of analysis:
Platform’s content provision
strategy and profits
Monopoly content supplier’s
pricing strategy and profits
Role of competition
between content suppliers
Impact of consumers’ desire for content
Platform strategy Transition from a free-content
strategy to a paid-content-with-ads
strategy
Proposition 1(a) Transition from a free-content
strategy to paid-content-with-ads
strategy, then again to a freecontent strategy
Claim 4(b)
Platform profits ↓ Proposition 1(a) ↓ Claim 4(c)
Supplier profits 0 N/A ↑ Proposition
3(a)
Content provision ↑ Claim 1(a) ↑ Claim 5(a)
Consumer price ↑ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 1(a) ↑ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 5(a)
0 (free-content strategy) 0 (free-content strategy)
Impact of advertisers’ desire for consumers
Platform strategy Transition from a paid-content-withads strategy to a free-content
strategy
Proposition 1(b) Transition from a paid-content-withads strategy to a free-content
strategy
Claim 4(a)
Platform profits ↑ Proposition 1(b) ↑ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 4, (c)
and (d) ↓ then ↑ (free-content strategy)
Supplier profits 0 N/A ↓ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Proposition
3(b) ↑ (free-content strategy)
Content provision ↓ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 1(b) ↓ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 5(b)
↑ (free-content strategy) ↑ (free-content strategy)
Consumer price ↓ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 1(b) ↓ (paid-content-with-ads strategy) Claim 5(b)
0 (free-content strategy) 0 (free-content strategy)
Adoption of a no-ad
strategy
A no-ad strategy can be adopted Proposition
6(b)
No-ad strategy cannot be
adopted
Proposition
6(a)
A no-ad strategy can be adopted Proposition
6(b)
Content price and market
power
An increase in content price may
improve platforms’ profits
Proposition 2 A monopoly content supplier may
not extract all the surplus from the
competing platforms
Proposition 4 Competing content suppliers may
charge higher prices than a
monopoly content supplier
Proposition 5
Note. N/A, Not applicable.
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms
’ Content Provision Strategies and Pro
fits
12 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1
–21, © 2021 INFORMS
understanding of the strategic interaction among the
various market participants before choosing a strategy. Specifically, our analysis offers useful insights
on a few questions of managerial significance:
• Can an increase in consumers’ desire for content hurt
media platforms’ profits? One might expect consumers’
desire to listen to songs to improve the profits of
music-streaming platforms, such as Pandora and
Spotify. Our analysis clarifies why platforms’ profits
can be hurt by consumers’ desire for content irrespective of the content provision strategy (see Proposition 1(a)). First, platforms adopting a paid-contentwith-ads strategy, such as Pandora and Spotify, have
an opportunity to take advantage of the higher willingness to pay by charging consumers a higher price
if consumers’ desire for content increases. But these
platforms also need to compete for consumers by
offering a higher proportion of content (and a lower
proportion of ads). The additional revenue from
consumers is not sufficient to offset the reduction in
advertising revenue and the higher procurement cost,
leading to lower profits for platforms. Second, consumers’ desire for content can even hurt the profits of
streaming platforms, such as Jango, that pursue a
free-content strategy. Notice that when platforms
pursue a free-content strategy, they earn nothing from
consumers. In this context, competing to offer more
content raises the content procurement cost and further reduces advertising revenue, hurting platforms’
profits. Thus, irrespective of platforms’ strategies, an
increase in consumers’ desire for content reduces
media platforms’ profits. Consistent with this finding,
the New York Times Company has seen an overall
decrease in its profits (Lee 2019, Strauss 2019, Tracy
2019), although consumers’ valuation of news content
has increased (Newman 2017).
• Can media platforms earn higher profits when they
pay a higher price to the content supplier? Currently, the
statutory rate set by the U.S. Congress for broadcasting songs of five minutes or less is $0.08. Pandora’s
per-play royalty rate for streaming music is $0.016,
whereas YouTube’s is a mere $0.00074 (Sanchez 2018).
Recently, some artists, such as Taylor Swift, have
strived to get better contract terms. One might speculate
that the efforts of artists to get better royalty rates might
hurt the likely profits of music-streaming platforms. Our
analysis shows when and why this conjecture might not
be valid (see Proposition 2). Note that under a freecontent strategy, a higher content price has two
countervailing effects. On the one hand, it raises a
platform’s payment to the content supplier (holding
the amount of content fixed). On the other hand, it
motivates a platform to offer consumers less content;
the lower proportion of content increases the space
for advertising and, in turn, the advertising revenue. The
cost increase due to a higher content price can be more
than offset by the increase in advertising revenue.
Consequently, media platforms can earn higher profits
despite paying a higher price to the content supplier.
• Can advertisers’ desire for consumers decrease a
content supplier’s profits? On the surface, it appears
that if advertisers value listeners more, then content
suppliers, such as artists, should earn more profits.
However, the answer to the above question is contingent on the strategy of platforms (see Proposition 3). In a monopoly content supplier market, an
increase in advertisers’ desire for consumers motivates both platforms to offer less content under a
paid-content-with-ads strategy, and this makes the
content supplier earn lower profits because it faces a
weaker demand. However, when platforms adopt a
free-content strategy, they offer more content because
they compete more intensely for the consumers who
are more valuable now. In this case, because the demand is stronger, the monopolist content supplier
earns more profits. Thus, depending on platforms’
content provision strategies, advertisers’ desire for
consumers can have opposing effects on the content
supplier’s profits.
• Does a content supplier’s ability to extract profits
depend on its market power? Some content suppliers,
such as the NFL and FIFA, have substantial consumer
pull. Our analysis explains why even a monopoly
content supplier cannot fully extract all the surplus
from the platforms irrespective of whether platforms
are adopting a free-content strategy (e.g., NBC) or a
paid-content-with-ads strategy (e.g., ESPN). Specifically, we find that a monopoly content supplier may
not be able to extract all the surplus from competing
platforms (see Proposition 4). Moreover, a duopoly
content supplier may even charge a higher price than a
monopoly content supplier does (see Proposition 5).
Notice that platforms have an option to earn profits
from the advertiser side of the market. Thus, in a
monopoly content supplier market, a high content
price induces platforms to offer less content but earn
more advertising revenue from the expanded advertising space, resulting in a weaker demand for
content. As the monopoly content supplier recognizes
this possibility, it cannot exercise its monopoly power
over the platforms. In a duopoly content market,
when a competing content supplier increases its price,
platforms do not necessarily switch to another content supplier but they may turn to the advertising
revenue by offering less content, especially when the
contents are less substitutable. In this case, the negative effect of a unilateral price increase is shared
by both content suppliers. Hence, each supplier is
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS 13
motivated to increase its own content price even
higher than that of a monopoly content supplier.
• Will platforms shun the advertisers even when it is
possible to earn profits from the advertiser side of the
market? The answer is no if the content supplier is a
monopolist, but yes if the content market turns competitive (see Proposition 6). Notice that platforms are
motivated to pursue a no-ad strategy only if the price
of content is sufficiently low. However, the monopoly
content supplier does not sell the content at a low
enough price. The monopoly content supplier charges a
high price for content because it recognizes that platforms adopting a no-ad strategy need to offer the
maximum amount of content to consumers. The high
content price, in turn, forces platforms to cater to
advertisers, and thus pursue either a paid-contentwith-ads strategy or a free-content strategy. We obtain the opposite result when content suppliers compete. If the contents are sufficiently substitutable, the
price of content is reduced. The low price of content can
motivate platforms to adopt a no-ad strategy and earn
their entire profits from consumers. Therefore, if the
content supplier market is competitive and consumers’
dislike for advertising is large, platforms may forgo the
advertising market even if they could earn some profits
from advertisers by pursuing a multisided strategy.
Thus, our analysis offers a useful insight into the behavior of no-ad platforms, such as Netflix and Tidal.
7.1. Directions for Further Research
Multisided media markets are rapidly growing, and
managers are exploring a variety of strategies. In this
paper, we focus on the content supplier’s pricing
decision and investigate its implications for a media
platform’s content provision strategy and the source
of its profits. In practice, content suppliers make several
other important decisions, such as what the quality of the
content they produce should be, and how they should
distribute the content (through a traditional media
platform or a news aggregator). Moreover, platforms
may source their contents not only from independent
content suppliers but also from in-house content creators, in which case, the strategic interaction between
platforms and content suppliers will be different. Future
research can explore these strategic decisions. Next,
many platforms adopt a freemium strategy either to
induce trials or to price discriminate heterogeneous
segments of consumers. Although our model focuses on
one segment of consumers in a market of a fixed size,
thereby removing any scope for freemium, future research may extend the model to explore the opportunity
for a freemium strategy in a multisided market. It would
also be useful to confront our theoretical predications
with field and experimental data. Thus, media markets
present several interesting avenues for further theoretical
and empirical research.
Acknowledgments
This paper is based on the doctoral dissertation of Jinzhao Du.
The authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Appendix
In this main appendix, we provide the proofs for the
propositions. Below, we first state the lemmas that describe
Table of Contents
Analysis of a Perfectly Competitive Content Market
Lemma 1 (Equilibrium characterization)
Lemma 2 (Parameter space )
Proposition 1
Proposition 2
Claim 1 (Comparative Statics)
Claim 2 (Replication of Proposition 1 with New Ad Price)
Claim 3 (Replication of Proposition 2 with New Ad Price)
Analysis of a Monopoly Content Market
Lemma 3 (Parameter space)
Claim 4 (Replication of Proposition 1)
Claim 5 (Comparative Statics)
Proposition 3
Proposition 4
Analysis of a Moderately Competitive Content Market
Lemma 4 (Second-stage equilibrium)
Lemma 5 (Concavity condition for content suppliers’
profit function)
Proposition 5
Proposition 6
Table A.1. Summary of Notation
Notation Description
v Consumers’ desire for content
γA Advertisers’ desire for consumers
t Consumers’ transportation cost
c The marginal cost of producing content
α The proportion of a platform’s bandwidth allocated for
content
αf The proportion of a platform’s bandwidth allocated for
content under a free-content strategy
αpa The proportion of a platform’s bandwidth allocated for
content under a paid-content-with-ads strategy
ni The number of consumers that join platform i
ps The content supplier’s price for content
τ The threshold of content price at which a platform
transitions from adopting a paid-content-with-ads
strategy to using a free-content strategy
pfS The (interior) equilibrium content price if a platform
uses a free-content strategy
ppaS The (interior) equilibrium content price if a platform
offers paid-content-with-ads
ps The “average” price of content in a duopoly model of
content suppliers
∏iP Profits of duopoly platform i
∏S Profits of the monopoly content supplier
∏iS Profits of duopoly content supplier i
MRS Marginal rate of substitution of the two content
suppliers in the presence of duopoly content
suppliers
hi The fraction of content that platform i procure from
supplier 1
γc Consumers’ dislike for advertisements
Amaldoss, Du, and Shin: Platforms’ Content Provision Strategies and Profits
14 Marketing Science, Articles in Advance, pp. 1–21, © 2021 INFORMS
the equilibrium outcome and define the parameter space.
Then using the lemmas, we prove the propositions. The
proofs of the lemmas can be found in the Online Appendix.
Ancillary claims made in the paper are stated here but
proved in the Online Appendix. Please note that equations
featuring in the Online Appendix start with letter “B